The Science Fiction Radio Show A commentary on science fiction today Presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
This is David Cruz Daryl Lane And David Carson
This show will be an interview with science fiction author Joan D. Vingy Joan
Vingy is one of the best of the group of young science fiction authors that
appeared in the 70s Her first story, Tin Soldier, was published in 1974 And
since then she's written two novels and a number of novellas and short stories
In 1977 she received a Hugo Award for one of her stories, Eyes of Amber She has
experimented convincingly with a future history and with world building And is
noted for her credible and fascinating aliens Perhaps most readers though
respond most strongly to her characters They are vividly and realistically
drawn, easily identified with And they remain with the reader long after he's
finished one of her stories
How did you get started writing science fiction? Well, there are sort of two
versions of that in a way There's my official writing career Which began after I
first got married to Werner Vingy, my now ex-husband He was a science fiction
writer at the time And I had been a person who fooled around with writing for a
while before that I would just diddle around with it I used to want to be an
artist and writing was just something I did kind of privately And never showed
to anybody and rarely finished anything either But Werner encouraged me to take
it seriously if I was going to write By that time I'd abandoned wanting to be an
artist Because my college art professors had ruined my desire to do art And I
was sort of casting about And he knew that I liked to write And so he encouraged
me to attempt to take it seriously And sit down and do something and finish it
And so I decided that I would take him up on that And I started doing a story
Which turned out to be the first story that I sold It was called Tin Soldier And
when I started writing it I didn't know if I'd ever get it finished or anything
But I did get it finished And I showed it to him And he said he thought it was
saleable And so I started sending it out And I did sell it And after that I was
hooked of course And I wanted to go on being a writer Does your background in
anthropology have much influence on your writing? Well actually it does play a
pretty big role in the writing Because I find that anthropology and science
fiction Have a lot of things in common for me Archaeology was my specialty And
archaeology is the anthropology of the past And science fiction for me is the
anthropology of the future They form sort of a long continuum And the thing I
like about both science fiction and anthropology Is that they allow you to see
how other people do things And that other people's lives are not led the same
way yours is And that there are other ways of coping That aren't necessarily the
ones you've always known That other people do things differently And get along
perfectly well that way I love the way that both anthropology and science
fiction Can take your preconceptions and kind of turn them around 180 degrees
And make you say gee I never thought of it like that before Specifically I like
to use my anthropological background too When I'm setting up societies for the
stories that I'm going to write I do sort of an ethnography which is a cultural
study Only I have to make up details of the culture in general Instead of just
studying an anthropological culture I do get a lot of details, bits and pieces
of interesting societies Which I recombine sometimes to create science fictional
societies It gives you a way of thinking I think that's very useful when you're
writing a science fiction story Looking for different ways Hoping that when you
send your rocket ship out into the galaxy It's not going to come to a planet
where everyone acts like 1950s Earth And I really enjoy exploring differences in
societies And things like that And well mythology is kind of an offshoot of
anthropology That I find is very useful to science fiction too I get a lot of
story ideas from mythology And a lot of, I think, just kind of underlying
strengths That are almost like fantasy And I like to weave them into the science
fiction Which is what I most like to write And I think it gives a stronger
appeal somehow Could that be because we have sort of a common background of
folktales and myths And by weaving these into your stories You sort of reinforce
or update some of the old basic stories That our culture is based on Right,
yeah, I think very much so I think there really are certain universalities in
myths too Which kind of strike everybody At a very deep and basic level And if
you could capture some of that same feeling In a story when you write it Maybe
by employing elements consciously or unconsciously Of, you know, out of the
mythology I think that you could really have a very deep emotional impact on the
reader Which I think is probably what every writer would like to do I've noticed
that a lot of your stories seem to have a happy ending Could that be because
some of them have their basis in folktales Or is it because you're just
basically an optimistic person? I think it's more that I'm basically an
optimistic person Actually, not every single one of my stories is based on a
folktale A lot of them do have those elements in them But some don't It's just
that I really, I hate to leave a story feeling totally depressed by it And so I
think I hate to write a story that's totally depressing Frequently, I think the
stories have sort of bittersweet endings Or, you know, people don't walk off
hand in hand into the sunset They're usually dragging along, you know, a few
suitcases full of problems too But, you know, I think the way life is, it's
unrealistic usually to write a totally happy ending But I do like to have an
optimistic ending When I read things, I relate to them on a very personal level
I get very involved in a story And if it's a story, the end result of which is
to make me feel totally depressed And feel like, you know, why bother to live? I
really don't like being left feeling that way And I think I don't like feeling
that way when I write, too Yes, it seems that you get very involved with your
characters that you create Is it because you flesh them out so well when you
create them? Or is it because the characters are sort of variations on yourself?
Well, I think probably some of both I think a lot of my favorite characters are,
you know, bits and pieces of me I don't know that any one of them is all me I
think all people have different aspects of their personality Which come to the
fore at different times Just in their day-to-day life And I think when you're
writing, you can't help but Inject those personalities into characters I really
do like characters in stories I like to read about characters who seem real And
so I like to try and make my own characters as real as possible when I write
them And I think, you know, by getting inside their heads I invariably, you
know, stick a few of my thoughts in there I do have some characters who are
based on other people I know And things like that, too But I do like to I like
to, you know, well, when I write about strange things And new ideas in different
societies I like to put people who are recognizably human Even if they're
aliens, I suppose But people that the reader can relate to into those situations
And let the reader see how the human being reacts To the strange set of
circumstances It's not simply the strange set of circumstances which interests
me Although that's, I think, why I write science fiction Because I like... I
don't like to write about the same old day-to-day thing I like to explore new
ground But I like to do it with actual characters Who, you know, come as close
as possible To seeming like real people I like to see what they do in the given
circumstances Yes Science fiction is the only literature Which allows you to
explore the future Which opens up quite a few vistas That mainstream literature
just doesn't have Right And that's really what I like about science fiction I
read my first science fiction book When I was in ninth grade And I just felt
like, you know Boy, where has this been all my life I was just swept away by it
And I felt like I really hardly wanted to read anything But science fiction
after that It was just so exciting to me To know these new worlds opened up to
me Yes, I remember one of the characters in Eyes of Amber Is a singer, a
songwriter And it seems like music plays an important role in your writing Yes,
it really does, actually I seem to relate to music on a kind of subliminal level
I guess it operates something like mythology for me When I hear a song I
frequently get down into the song And start wondering what's going on in the
background of it And, you know, the situation that's set up in the song Leads me
to think, well, who are the people involved in this And how did they get here
And what is this talking about? Actually, I tend to relate to songs in a very
personal way That they have a kind of reality about them I frequently can't help
thinking that the songwriter Must have written that about his or her own
experience Even though I know it's no more likely that they did And that someone
writing fiction necessarily wrote a story about their own life But I just enjoy
music tremendously And it really stimulates creative juices for me So I
frequently do wind up being inspired to write certain things By listening to
music In fact, Eyes of Amber The title of that story is taken from the song by
Buffy St. Marie Which is about someone who has a demon lover And sort of fit
into the context of the story Where the alien woman thinks of the space probe as
a demon And she relates to it Because it does respond to her Although she
doesn't know it's the human beings on Earth She relates to it as another being
And has this kind of fascination for it And it's just taking little elements
like that And working them into stories It's one of the pleasures of writing for
me Since you do have a rather good background in anthropology How do you go
about constructing your aliens? Oh, that's an interesting question, actually I
don't think I have any particular method for constructing aliens They frequently
kind of arise out of other givens in the situation And out of the environment In
Eyes of Amber, the aliens, although they seem superficially humanoid Were
actually constructed for an entirely different nitrogen-breathing situation And
they had a different situation on a world And one of the, yes, one of the noons
of Saturn A world which was extremely cold And they were tryphibians Which meant
that they spent part of the time in the sky Part on the land and part in the
water And the creatures in Crystal Ship were sort of marsupial-like And the
creatures in my story, to Belle the cat Thrived on radiation They just lived on
pure radiation They lived in essentially a hot, you know, an incredibly
radioactively hot swamp on a planet Hidden away in a cave But there's actually
no real pattern to any of them The creatures living in the cave came out of the
idea of there being Essentially natural nuclear reactors forming on the Earth
There was an article somewhere about how there seemed to be the fossil remains
of one somewhere in Africa, I think It seemed that at some point a concentration
of ore had gotten so radioactively hot That it had actually started a
thermonuclear reaction Not a bomb, but just a, you know, kind of a roiling,
boiling situation And so I had these creatures that had come from a whole planet
that was like that And had been shipwrecked essentially on this planet Which
would be normal to human beings And they had managed to find this spot and take
refuge in it And that was just, you know, it came out of trying to think of what
sort of creatures would live in that environment I suppose I must in general
start with the environment And then try to think about what sort of adaptations
would be necessary to it I don't know, aliens are one of those things that just
sort of spring out of the unconscious, I guess I don't really have a pattern for
creating them Except that I start with certain givens of the culture One of the
problems with creating aliens is that if you make them too alien Then the reader
can't understand them or relate to them And they just seem to be essentially
nonsensical It's very difficult to try to convey a feeling of alienness And yet
something that a human being can still relate to And not simply say, you know,
what is this junk? I don't understand this And stop reading the book A lot of
science fiction writers have talked about that And there are frequently
accusations about Well, you know, the aliens are not really alien enough But
then you come down to the old bottom line That if they are alien enough Even if
one human being can imagine something that alien Someone else may not be able to
understand it So you're always caught in the mind when you're writing about
aliens In To Bell the Cat, you've created one of the most alien aliens I've ever
encountered The being, as I understand it, is in two parts The intelligence is
located deep in a cave And it controls its mobile parts, the little creatures
And all other parts of the cave and out on the surface But its thought processes
are amazing How did you come up with this idea? This reminds me of a story about
Robert Browning When a woman asked him one time what one of his poems meant And
he said, Madam, when I wrote that Only God and I knew what it meant And now only
God knows I can't actually remember how I came up with that idea It's terrible I
don't know whether it's in my notes anywhere or not I think it must have grown
Kind of grown out of the idea of specialization in animals Where, you know, a
human being is, biologically speaking A very unspecialized creature Because it
has fingernails Which are the most primitive form of things As opposed to a claw
or a hoof Which are adaptations, you know, specializations of nails And, you
know, there are various other things about the human body Which are, quote,
primitive biologically And I guess I may have been thinking about specialization
Developing to an extreme Where actual different parts of the body Became
separate entities And they were all controlled by the mind Which stayed in one
spot Some of the specialized parts were particularly strong And some were
particularly agile And things like that And they could be sent out kind of far
-ranging And controlled telepathically by the brain Which just stayed at home in
safety And there were essentially two levels of organism Which made up one
creature And the specialized creatures that the brain controlled Had no
particular brain of their own Only sort of a rudimentary receiver So that it
could send them its commands And it could receive back from various impressions
Of what they were doing I wound up, the way they communicate Became, it was sort
of like writing poetry For me, I used to like to write poetry And this became as
close to a million as I had For a long time And then while the brain creatures
Were communicating with each other With the other brains And discussing their
plight They were at the same time Receiving input and sending directions To all
their mobiles Their little specialized parts That were moving around And the
radioactive muck And so you would get their basic commentary And then all the
levels below that Of interaction And I really enjoyed writing about that I
thought it was quite exciting When I was doing it But the trouble is that I
think I only found one person Who actually understood Without having it
explained to them What was going on in that story Almost no one else understood
And I felt like that was the case Where my aliens had gotten too alien For their
own good You've undertaken another difficult writing task That being world
building In your novel The Snow Queen It's a wonderful work of science fantasy
You would call it science fantasy Wouldn't you? I suppose so actually It is, you
know, in its heart It's a science fiction story But it does have heavy
mythological elements Which I think give it a fantasy-like quality And I wasn't
fighting that at all I was striving for a sort of fusion Oh good, well then I
can call it A wonderful work of science fantasy It's got a very involved plot
And a very exciting narrative This must have taken a tremendous amount Of
background development Yes, probably Oh gosh That book was quite an incredible
thing For me to write that book Because I wound up being It was over 600 pages
of manuscript It's almost 200,000 words long And when I started writing it I had
never written a complete novel All at once With Outcast of Heaven Belt I had
written a novella And then I had increased in size To that of a novel And I was
feeling kind of daunted About the very idea of writing a normal What I thought
would be a normal length novel Of about 200 pages But I finally did sit down And
start to write it And the more I wrote The more I realized That it was not going
to stop at 200 pages I think I had gotten through 100 pages And realized that I
had barely gotten Into the plot at all My writing And from then on I could only
just go on And write and write and write And see where it led me It got more and
more complicated As it went along Until I really despaired at times That I would
never be able To finish the thing It was a great comfort to me When I finally
sat down And figured out How everything had to fit together To get to the end of
the book I did a fair amount of background work Beforehand But actually I wound
up doing A great deal of the work I think during the process Of writing the book
I had conceived of the idea Of the wicked city of Carbuckle Which gets its name
Because it's either a jewel Or a fester Depending on your point of view But I
wanted it to be Sort of a place Where all kinds of cultures From all kinds of
worlds Came together And mixed and mingled And in trying to make A portrait of
the city I needed a lot of Different characters With a lot of different
Backgrounds behind them And so I would Whenever I needed A new character I would
write one Into the story And then I'd kind of have To figure out Where they came
from Frequently I don't Lay everything out Before I actually Start to write a
book I have kind of A basic structure Which I think It was being sort of Like a
trellis And then the story Is a line That grows up Through it And fills it in
And fleshes it out And things And I think Because I didn't have Any idea of How
big the snow queen Was going to be It got even more Complex You know In the
process Than most of the things Most of the things I have a clearer idea Ahead
of time Of what they're going To be about But it was just so massive It was
impossible To think about Everything ahead of time It was mostly The scientific
research I think that I did Ahead of time Reading up on black holes And things
like that I regret that black holes And clones Became such kind of Stereotypes
During the time Which I was reading The book They weren't They were not Quite
such archetypal Sci-fi cliches When I started Writing the book As they are now
But at least Since I hope The book will appeal To a wide audience At least Maybe
people Who don't even Regularly read Science fiction Will know What I'm talking
about And I talk about Black holes and clones At this point But I did I did do a
fair amount Of technical reading Or semi-technical reading On the nature Of
black holes And using them As means of travel In order to Set up the Basic
science fictional Premises of the book And I did I happened to read Robert
Graves' book The White Goddess Just before I Started writing The Snow Queen And
that I found that Influenced me heavily And that I got A lot of Of the mythical
Fantasy type elements Out of that And kind of Wove them into The texture Of the
book And I tried To create Societies Which would Kind of Fit in with The most
Technical and Non-technical Societies Which would Fit comfortably With kind of
The underlying Themes and Premises of the book And from there I just Things just
Growed Like Tomsy I guess One of the Characters Comes from A very Advanced
Society The most Technologically Dominant Society In the book Started out As a
Walk-on Character His name Is Gandolino And he Came along With one Of the major
Characters In the book And he Just started Acting up And out Of his Personality
I kind Of saw A whole Cultural Stereotype Growing And I Realized Part of
Actually Part of Where he Came from Was that I had Been reading A lot Of books
About I've been Reading Some fiction Books About Romans In Britain Because I've
Always been Fascinated By Romans In Britain Part of The Archaeology Thing I
guess And Just the Kind of Fascination With The Science Fictional Reversal Where
The Highly Cultured People Are The People Who Too Often Wind Up In Sword And
Sorcery Fantasies The Kind Of Dark And Swarthy People And They're Usually
Spelping Around In The Bushes But They Were The People Who Were Suave And
Sophisticated And On Top And The People With Red Hair And Freckles And Green
Eyes Were Running Running Running Around Like Howling Barbarians In The Brush
And I Thought That Was A Delightful Twist Thinking About Cultural Arrogance And
How The Romans Sort Of Resembled Victorian English In That Way I Just Got Into A
Mindset To Write About That Sort Of Character I Think And So Without Even
Realizing It This Particular Character Just Began Taking On All These Aspects
And Out Of Him I Realized What His Whole Culture Must Be Like And It Became One
Of The Important
Societies In The Book And Just Odd Little Things Happened Like That That The
Book Kind Of Grew Up In A Strange Way It Was Quite An Indescribable Thing And If
I Had Known Ahead Of Time What I Was Getting Into I Would Never Have Started It
Probably Just As Well That We Can't See The Future I Think Oh Yes Correct Me If
I'm Wrong But Didn't I Read Somewhere That Your Story Is Based Upon The Hans
Christian Anderson Fairy Tale Called The Snow Queen Oh Yes It Is As Matter Of
Fact That Was My Original Inspiration For The Book There Is A Cartoon An
Animated Movie Of The Snow
If You Can Wait Through 15 Minutes Of Art Linkletter Talking To Children At The
Beginning Of It It It's Really Quite Well Done I Was Interested In It You Know I
First Seen That Movie When I Was In About Eighth Grade And Oh This Is Silly But
When I Saw It Again Back During The Seventies Sometime I I Realized What An
Interesting Fairy Tale It Is It's
Particular Amount About Near Eastern And European Mythology You See A Lot Of
Symbolic Archetypes You See Ravens And Stags And The Wicked Stepmother And The
Sweet Young Innocent And Things Like That Which You Know They All Actually Have
Their Archetypes Back In European And Near Eastern Mythology And That Well That
Just As An Aside That Was Why The Robert Graves Book On The White Goddess And On
All That Mythology In Europe And The New East Fit In So Perfectly With This
Particular Story That Hans Christian Anderson Had Written Down But Was
Essentially One Of These Old Tales Which Are Kind Of Twisted Up Mythology And
The Thing That Interested Me Especially About This Particular Tale Was That
There Is No Prince In It It It Usually Prince Who And Exciting Things Like
Fighting The Dragons And Things Like That And Waking Up The Sleeping Maiden And
The Women In The Story Are Usually Either The Wicked Old Witch Or Some Helpless
Simpering Creature And You know I get Sort of Bored With That Kind Of Thing But
I Was Very Interested This Book Was Quite A Twist Because Or This Fairy Tale Was
Quite A Twist Because All The Main Roles In It Were Played By Women The Basic
Idea Of The Story Is That There Are A Little Girl And A Little Boy Who Are
Friends And The Little Boy Is Stolen Away By The Snow Queen Who Is Kind Of
And Unique And I Was In The Mood To Do A Story In Which Women Played Major Roles
In The Book And So I Thought That Was A Good Jumping Off Point For It And So I
You Know From There Everything Else Just Started Growing Basically I Read Robert
Graves Book And I Said Boy This Gives Me A Lot More Fuel For The Fire And I Just
Started Writing At That Point I Didn't Want To Write A Fantasy Though I Didn't
Want To Just Make It A Retelling Of The Fairy Tale Basically I Really Wanted It
To Be A Whole New Story And I Wanted It To To Be Science Fiction As Well Because
That's Just The Way My Brain Works I Guess I Have Written A Couple Of Fantasy
Stories Recently I I Always Enjoyed Reading Fantasy
Author Critic And Editor Ben Bova Has Praised Joan Vingy For Blending Believable
Science With Believable Characters No Easy Task The Best Way To Know And
Appreciate Joan Vingy Is To Buy One Of Her Books And Start Reading For Those Who
Do There Should Be No Disappointments
This Is David Cruz And David Carson This Has Been The Science Fiction Radio Show
A Presentation Of The Permian Basin Science Fiction Association In Conjunction
With KOCV FM And Odessa College Odessa Texas